[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It said that about
2,500 years ago,
the reformed ascetic
Siddhartha Gautama,
wishing to dispel all ignorance,
sat down under a sacred fig
tree to meditate with
final determination and was
enlightened to the
truth of all existence.
Over the next
millennium and a half,
the teachings of the Buddha
slowly spread throughout Asia,
bringing a light to darkness
and peace to conflict.
Now, the Dharma has come sailing
on the jet streams of modernity
into the heart of
this culture that
runs on the twin engines of
competition and acquisition,
where many consider cruelty to
be kindness and ignorance to be
knowledge.
If its history is any
judge, the subtle path
of spiritual development that
our colonialist forefathers
dubbed Buddhism has begun a
migration that, over time, will
leave it, and possibly modernity
itself, greatly transformed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What is it going
to look like from--
that's anyone's guess.
>> It will not survive.
It will be an anachronistic,
esoteric, Asiatic something
here in the West.
But nobody will take it serious
if it clings to old structures.
>> We're not going to create
an indigenous Western Buddhism.
And we don't want to create an
indigenous Western Buddhism.
We're not here to be, OK,
you guys were the Chinese
Buddhists.
[? You're the thing. ?] We're
American Buddhists.
Not at all, that's
useless, totally useless.
It's too late in
history for that.
>> If Buddhism is to become
a living and vital cultural
presence in modernity, it needs
to rethink some of its most
fundamental doctrines.
>> But I want to be
able to recognize it.
Do I call it psychology?
Do I call it stress reduction?
Do I call it art?
I want to be able to
recognize it as Buddhism.
So there, I'm old hat.
Old traditionalist conservative.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The societal imperative of
Buddhism has been described
as the battle between
enlightenment and ignorance one
individual at a time.
Modernity, then, would
be the battleground.
And how Buddhism responds
to its formidable challenges
will determine how
successful it will be.
So this is a road movie that
will wind through Europe
and North America to visit
many of the first generation
of Western-born Buddhist
teachers, the intrepid Dharma
pioneers, to look
through their eyes
at how the Buddha Dharma is
making out in its encounter
with the West.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Like all world
religions, Buddhism
is no stranger to
migration into new lands.
What may be different, though,
is its chameleon-like ability
to adopt widely differing
cultural and religious forms.
>> You don't see that
in any other religion.
>> No.
I think there's a
fundamental reason for that.
>> John Crook is the
principal Dharma teacher
in England's Western
Chan Fellowship.
He lives in the
west of the country
off a dirt road in a
large old house that also
serves for individual retreats.
>> The initial prophets of,
say, of Islam or of Christianity
were very great
men, very clearly.
But what happened in
both cases after that,
the formation of churches,
all depended upon dogmas.
Things must be
believed or things must
be behaved in certain ways.
And in both Christianity
and in Islam,
this has led to terrible warfare
and disputes between Catholic
and Protestant and between
the branches of Islam--
appalling.
You can see the sea out there.
By and large, Buddhism
has been free from that.
Why is that?
Because, in my view, it's
dependent not on dogmas
but on what are, in fact,
empirical statements about how
the mind works.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> San Francisco is Buddhism's
birthplace in the West
in modern times.
It had previously arrived
here in the early years
of the 19th century with
Chinese and Japanese immigrants.
But it remained within
their communities.
In the succeeding
decades, here and there,
small pockets of
Western converts
gathered around
an Asian teacher.
But it wasn't until the
counterculture of the 1950s
and '60s that the ground
was fertile enough
to sustain a
permanent transplant.
By the late '50s, the leading
lights of the Beat Generation
had congregated here,
many of them inspired
by the ideas of Zen Buddhism.
>> Nothing was really
practiced, was it?
>> Actually, not
many people, no.
There was no such
thing as practice.
Gary Schneider went
to Japan and practiced
in [? Rinzei ?] Monastery, and
probably a few other people.
>> Mel Weitzman is the Roshi
at the Berkeley Zen Center.
Now in his 80s,
in the late '50s,
he was an art student plugged
into the counterculture scene.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> There was interest.
But the interest didn't
have any place to go.
So when Suzuki Roshi came, he
was one of the first people--
maybe the first one, really--
'59.
>> In 1959, a Zen priest named
Shunryu Suzuki had arrived from
Japan to minister to San
Francisco's immigrant Japanese
community.
But he also found interest from
an unexpected source thanks
to the phone company.
>> Here we are.
People started calling
him because they
saw Zen in the telephone book.
And they were looking
for something.
Then he said, well, I start
sitting at 5:45 in the morning.
So you're welcome to
come and sit with me.
And people did.
We have about eight
residents here.
And then, finally, the
Japanese congregation
gave them a room upstairs.
This is where Dokusan
would do interviews.
So little by little,
the Zen Center
formed around Suzuki Roshi.
You want to see inside?
>> Sure.
>> I have to separate
my keys from--
>> Ooh, very serious.
[CHUCKLES]
>> And then, there was always
a tension between the Japanese
congregation and the
American congregation.
Because the American
congregation
was a lot of hippies.
Not everybody-- I
mean, there were
doctors and lawyers,
professional people,
but a good deal of hippiness.
And Suzuki Roshi
loved the hippies
because they
represented something
that people were actually
seeking seriously.
Because the Japanese
congregation was like a church.
So he was really taken by
the innocence of the hippies.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The young denizens of the
counter-culture soon received
Suzuki Roshi's
full-time attention.
He had Mel Weitzman looking
for property in Berkeley
while others found an old
home for single Jewish women
in the city proper that became
the San Francisco Zen Center.
There was, however, at
least one cultural ritual
of the hippies that was
incompatible with Zen
meditation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It was not at all unusual
in the beginning for one day
sitting to end and for a bunch
of people to go out to Golden
Gate Park and get stoned.
It changed with time.
It's hard to sit
[INAUDIBLE] stoned, really.
It doesn't work very well.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Despite these early hiccups,
it was clear that conditions
were now ripe for the
Dharma to rise in the West.
Soon, other Zen teachers were
sailing for Western shores.
Bernie Glassman, Roshi's teacher
Maezumi Roshi in Los Angeles,
and in Paris, [INAUDIBLE]
master Taisen Deshimaru
were just a few of many.
and Westerners were also taking
advantage of the new jet travel
to head off to the East, finding
teachers in Japan, Thailand,
Burma, and Ceylon.
And as a result of the tragedy
of the Tibetan exodus of 1959,
to India and Nepal where
the Dalai Lama and many
of the great
Tibetan masters were
accessible to the outside
world for the very first time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
By the late '60s and early
'70s, the Western-born acolytes
were beginning to return home
to face the challenge of how
to teach the Buddha
Dharma in a culture
so radically different
from its Asian roots.
>> The rise of modern
technology, transportation,
communication.
This whole society is
radically unlike any society
that Buddhism has
gravitated to or migrated to
and then assimilated with
over the last 2,500 years.
So this is an
unprecedented challenge.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The challenge has
begun to take shape.
There are the usual
scandals that plague
those in spiritual authority.
>> The different women
didn't know about each other.
>> And there were profound
debates raging in a quietly
Buddhist way about the role
of the spiritual teacher.
>> You are in a marketplace
situation that is driven more
by desire for fame and money
and success in a very worldly
sense.
>> The suitability of
Asian cultural forms--
>> We decided it was fine
for people to sit in chairs
because that's what
we do in this culture.
People didn't have to wear
robes or special garments.
>> The place of monasticism
in a culture of decidedly lay
practitioners--
>> Westerners think that
monasticism is something
Catholics did and we Protestants
don't, even if they happen
to be Jewish.
>> And even the fundamental
question of, what is
the essence of Buddhism itself?
Though many Buddhists might
disagree on the fine print,
most would agree
that the essence
can be found in the first
teachings of the Buddha.
>> If you look at the
history of Buddhism,
it is always of fine
adjustments and changes in those
fundamental, what are sometimes
called the fundamental
formulae, of the Buddha.
So what are they?
Well, of course, it's
the law of co-dependent
arising as the root of
the Four Noble Truths.
>> The Four Noble Truths explain
the nature of the suffering
and dissatisfaction--
its cause, its end, and
the path of practice that
leads to its end.
The law of co-dependent
arising is their foundation.
It states that all things arise
from an infinite web of cause
and effect.
And so no thing
exists independently.
Everything is void or empty
of an inherent self nature.
The implications of this are
as subtle as they are profound.
And this has made the
role of the teacher
essential for their
full unfolding
within the mind of the student.
But in today's West, that
role is facing new challenges.
We begin in the Bay
Area with its largest
Buddhist institution, the
fruit of Suzuki Roshi's
pioneering efforts, the
San Francisco Zen Center.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So this is the [INAUDIBLE],,
although it's not a great
likeness of him.
But what this room
does is give us
a place to focus our
gratitude to Suzuki Roshi.
That's the point of this room.
He was in this room
as he was dying
so that he would be
available to the students,
for them to see him and him to
see them, up until very soon
before he died.
>> Really?
>> Yeah.
So we bow to him
each time we pass.
We're extremely fortunate
to have this building.
It was a Jewish residence
hall for young ladies
away from their families.
Young ladies in the
'20s didn't live alone.
Apparently, this is
very famous for--
many matches were made here.
Because people have come
celebrating their 50th wedding
anniversary and bring
their grandchildren
to show them where
Grandpa and Grandma met.
So this is our Zendo,
our meditation hall.
This is the ceremonial hall.
This is where we have
morning service every day
and any ceremonies that
we do-- ordinations,
funerals, weddings.
>> Today's Zen Center, as it's
called, is one of the largest,
if not the largest, Buddhist
organizations outside Asia.
The downtown property consists
of a number of buildings
and is home to between 45 and
65 residents at any given time.
As well, there's Tassajara
Monastic Center in the Ventana
Wilderness and the Green
Gulch Farm Practice
Center in Marin County.
>> I have to say that the
second abbot, Richard Baker,
did a lot to build Zen Center.
I never wanted him to leave.
I wanted him to say,
gee, that was a mistake.
I'm really sorry.
But he couldn't do that.
>> Suzuki Roshi's Dharma
heir, Zentatsu Richard Baker,
became abbot after
Suzuki's death in 1971.
He was a gifted
organization builder
who successfully
raised the money
to buy the superb real estate
Zen Center enjoys today.
Baker was forced to resign
in 1984 after a scandal that
rocked the community.
>> He was having--
consensual-- but he was
having sexual relationships
with students.
And people got really upset
about it, and appropriately so.
It's not appropriate
for a teacher
to have sexual
relationships with students.
>> And this is the Zendo here.
>> What was interesting from
the point of view of Buddhism
in the West was not the scandal,
but the effect on the budding
community and how they dealt
with its aftermath both
psychologically and
organizationally.
>> It was the
death of innocence.
We had a kind of faith that
was naive and unrealistic.
And so when it all
happened and we kind of
realized that the person we
had faith in and that we had
projected was not the person
that was actually there,
it was enormously disturbing
on a lot of levels.
And so many people had
all kinds of breakdowns.
Many people left overnight.
>> Here was this sort of
traditionally hierarchical
situation which had
put him in isolation.
So there was no one
who could give him
the feedback he needed to say,
whoa, this isn't appropriate.
>> For some time, we were
in almost a holding pattern.
We weren't sure how to proceed
with our religious leadership.
We eventually did a redesign
of our administrative and
religious leadership structure.
>> We did go toward a much
more democratic structure with
an elected board.
Up until then, the board, of
course, was all appointed.
>> But the downside is that
you have a tremendous amount
of discussion that
has to take place.
Because I mean, if
you run a business,
you're really responsible for
people for eight hours a day
for that small portion of their
lives when they work for you.
If you're a place
like this, you're
responsible for
people 24 hours a day.
And not only for their economic
life and their physical life,
but for their spiritual life--
all their lives for the people
who stay for a whole lifetime.
So taking care of people and
dealing with people's problems
and issues in a way that
is inclusive and fair
requires enormous amounts of
communication and conversation.
And it actually makes
it hard to do things.
It makes it makes the running
of the organization a little bit
unwieldy, I think.
Democracy is pretty
unwieldy by its nature.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Traditionally, the role of
the teacher was defined by its
lineage line and the
surrounding culture.
Recognizing that many Westerners
would not be comfortable with
importing these institutions,
three young Americans--
students of traditional
Asian teachers--
began experimenting with
doing things in new ways
when they started the
Insight Meditation
Society and its west coast
spinoff, Spirit Rock.
>> One of the things that helped
us a lot is that we were able
to bring some of the greatest
teachers of our lineage
to America.
They blessed us, and
then they went home.
And what that did
made our community
different than the Zen
centers, or Tibetan centers,
or even Theraveda centers
where a person from Asia
came and settled here, like Zen
Master Suzuki Roshi or Chogyam
Trungpa or Rimpoche.
In those communities,
what grew around
the teacher was
in many ways a bit
of a replication of
Japan or Tibet or Burma.
Our teachers came, saw the deep
practice that we were doing,
added to it, blessed us,
and then returned and said,
you have to do it
in a Western form.
>> Jack Kornfield and friends
Joseph Goldstein and Sharon
Salzberg founded Insight
Meditation Society in 1975.
All three had spent a few years
studying Buddhist meditation
in Asia, mainly in the
Theraveda tradition of Thailand
and Burma.
Because of their backgrounds
with different teachers,
they decided to do
something atypical
and not base their new retreat
center on any one teaching
lineage.
A decade later, wanting
to build both a retreat
facility and something that
would help people integrate
the Dharma in their daily lives,
Jack moved out to the Bay Area
and founded Spirit
Rock in Marin County.
>> We decided to make a center
out here in the West Coast
close to the city so that
people could come for classes
and become part of a community,
so that there wasn't an area
of life that was spiritual
and another area that wasn't.
Because it's all sacred.
And in fact, the place that
we need it as much as anything
is in our finances, or
our personal relations,
or living on this
very small planet
with so many human beings.
>> Spirit Rock has grown rapidly
from its birth on 410 acres
of undeveloped land.
A large administrative staff
keeps all the activities,
schedules, and
facilities running.
>> This was all just a field
where they grew potatoes.
>> But many Western Dharma
teachers are like Sylvia
Wetzel.
They prefer their freedom to
running even a small Dharma
center.
>> --20 centimeters
high when we got it.
>> --with all the
responsibilities that can sap
energy away from
teaching and practice.
Thanks to modern transportation,
their business cards
could read--
have Dharma, will travel.
>> This is [? Sopata, ?]
my neighbor.
>> I'm a so-called
traveling teacher.
I have my private
living situation here.
And there are a
couple of centers
who invite me for longer
retreats from six to 10 days.
And these centers are mostly
Buddhist ecumenical centers.
They are run by people who--
and the house is open
for all traditions.
This is my hand library.
>> From her home on a gentrified
pig farm in the former East
Germany, Sylvia Wetzel has also
assembled an interconnected
network over three countries of
small semi-autonomous practice
groups that meet regularly,
support one another,
and integrate short retreats
into their weekly schedules.
>> --Western philosophy.
And it works.
It creates sangha feeling.
They feel really they
can support each other.
They feel supported
by their local group.
And it's not just sitting.
And it's not just ritual.
It's learning to digest
Dharma in daily life.
>> In America especially, many
teachers will travel to other
centers to lead
workshops or retreats.
This allows them to
expand their communities
and to supplement their incomes.
Aside from writing
a successful book
or shepherding a particularly
wealthy Dharma center,
there aren't too many other
ways to spread the Dharma
and make ends meet.
>> So Naropa originally
was a storefront operation.
>> Judith Simmer-Brown
is a professor at Naropa,
a university founded by the
Tibetan teacher Chogyam Trungpa
Rimpoche in Boulder,
Colorado back in the 1970s.
She is also a senior teacher
in Shambala International.
>> We have not developed a
really good system of patronage
of Dharma in the West.
And so it means that there
is a feeling that when
you're on the circuit
as a Dharma teacher,
that you are in a marketplace
situation that is driven more
by desire for fame
and money and success
in a very worldly sense.
And I think this is one of
the most dangerous things
for the integrity of
Buddhism in the West.
That as long as
people feel that they
have to be popular or successful
or financially doing very well,
that there is a big
problem, that we can easily
compromise the Dharma.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One major change from Asia
in the role teachers are playing
is the large number of women
who have become Dharma teachers.
>> There's certain perspective
and style that women bring
to the Dharma of not maybe
so attracted to a very
hierarchical approach.
And yet, not being shy of
being considered a teacher,
and being treated with
respect, and with the protocols
that are associated with
being a Dharma teacher.
>> Many people now, after
many years, respect what I do.
Before, they thought
I'm a wild feminist.
Why do you continue
this topic in Buddhism?
Feminism is a topic of the '70s.
Why do you deal with it?
Buddhism is beyond gender.
And so at first, they were a
little bit laughing about me
or not taking me seriously.
But after 30 years mentioning
the topic, it's accepted.
>> You wore them down.
[LAUGHING]
>> Well, I used my role as
token feminist in many Buddhist
contexts with, we say--
how could you say
that in English--
with holy stubbornness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Tibetan Buddhism
has many namtar,
enlightenment stories
of great yogis,
the vast majority
of whom were male.
Lama Tsultrim Allione, ordained
as a [INAUDIBLE] in 1970.
She was one of the very
first Western women
to become a Tibetan nun.
Four years later, she returned
her vows, got married,
and had children.
She continued her studies,
which led to her work
on women of wisdom,
namtar stories
of six extraordinary
female yogis in old Tibet.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This blue was the blue
that came in the dream that
the temple came out of.
I wasn't originally a feminist,
or really even somebody
that thought about
these things very much.
It didn't come until the
death of my daughter, Chiara,
who died at
two-and-a-half months.
And after she died-- she died
of sudden infant death syndrome.
And when that happened,
it was like everything
fell apart for me.
And so that was when
I started looking
for the stories of women.
The [INAUDIBLE],, the temple,
is quite extraordinary.
Once I developed this interest,
I really focused on it.
And some of my male teachers
had a problem with that.
And they thought
it was dualistic.
I went into retreat for a year,
partly with that question of,
is this something
I should give up?
Is it dualistic?
Or is this something that I need
to pursue and continue with?
And during the retreat,
it was in 2001 to 2002.
And so September
that year was 9/11.
My thought went to, where is
the feminine here in the lives
of these men who did this?
What about our reaction?
Where's the feminine in the
reaction of the United States
government?
That was a big sort of
watershed moment for me.
Because it meant that I had
to leave the father's house.
And that was incredibly
challenging to trust myself.
And at the same time, as
soon as I started doing that,
everything began
to flourish here.
Everything began to grow
and flourish in a way
that it hadn't before.
>> In 1993, Lama Tsultrim and
her husband had founded Tara
Mandala in the remote mountains
of southeastern Colorado.
However, raising the
substantial funds
necessary to build anything
had been difficult.
During her retreat in
2001, she had a vision
of a magnificent
temple devoted to Tara,
a prominent female meditational
deity in the Tibetan pantheon.
>> On the night of the
Buddha's enlightenment day
and parinirvana and his
birthday, I had a dream.
And in that dream, it
started with a color blue.
And out of the blue, the
temple began to form.
I woke up.
I sat up in bed.
And I went into meditation.
And then into my
cabin came this being
in a sphere of rainbow light
who I recognized as Vimalamitra,
who brought Buddhism to Tibet,
along with Padmasambava Guru
Rinpoche.
And he was very clear.
I could see everything--
the hair on his face,
the frayed threads on his robe.
And then he began to transmit
the rest of the temple to me.
And so--
>> In a complete design?
>> Yeah.
No toilets or kitchens or--
>> Because the teacher/student
relationship is normally one
of unusual depth, it
can frequently bring any
psychological issues in
students to the surface.
This can enable them
to heal and grow.
But it can also result in
an unhealthy dependency.
>> Reggie Ray was formerly a
professor at Naropa University
and a teacher in
Shambala International.
Reggie resigned from
both institutions
to found Dharma Ocean
in Crestone, Colorado,
overlooking the immense
and windy San Juan Valley.
>> Many people that come to the
Dharma come with a preexisting
sense of a tremendous
disempowerment as individuals.
And they are often
initially attracted--
for example, within Tibetan
Buddhism-- to the Lamas
who are presented as
being enlightened.
In other words, our
sense of disempowerment
makes us very vulnerable to
projecting onto our teachers
some kind of idealized
father that we never had.
Now, initially on the
path, that's necessary.
That motivates us to practice.
So it's a good thing.
But what often
happens, especially
in the Tibetan
tradition, is that people
enter into a lifelong
dependency on their Rimpoche
or their Lama.
And what I have found over
the course of my teaching
is that that lifelong dependency
makes it impossible for them
to grow in certain ways.
And it makes it impossible
for them to really enter
an adult stage of spirituality.
That's the protector up there.
Yeah, that's the mountain
where the protection
energy of this whole
area is constellated.
One of the issues
that comes up is,
what about the Asian teachers?
Don't they see that?
And aren't they
interested or motivated
to unravel that or untangle
it, dismantle that Oedipal
dependency of their students?
This is a very interesting
cultural issue.
Because in Tibet, that
lifelong dependency
was cultivated with lay people.
Literally, the vista is
about 100 miles from--
If you were a layperson,
that was kind of how it was.
The problem we have
in the West is,
when many of the Asian
teachers look at Westerners,
they see lay people.
And they see people
that maybe they
feel aren't going to
practice very much,
and aren't really going
to study very much,
and aren't going to
make the journey.
So there's a kind of
toleration on the side
of the Asian teachers
of that Oedipal
dependency in a lifelong
way that reinforces it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The Dharma center,
not the monastery,
is by far and away the most
common teaching institution
in the West.
Large urban areas typically
will have dozens of them.
They evolve because the vast
majority of Western Buddhists
are laity with families and
jobs and have no inclination
to become monks.
But each new Dharma
center is faced
with the problem of building
a community from scratch.
Lama Shenpen Hookham
is the resident teacher
at the Hermitage of the
Awakened Heart in Wales.
>> It was, [INAUDIBLE],, own
teacher who really changed
my direction.
Because I was very much
into the monastic model.
And he felt that
here in the West
we're going to have to practice
as we go along in our lives,
and that there's not
going to be the conditions
for the monastic model.
But on the other hand,
that has huge drawbacks.
Because we now
have to find a way
of being a community
supporting each other
in the practice of Dharma
in the West without a real--
how can you say--
sort of ready-made structure.
>> The monastery's traditional
distance from society is also
challenged by the complexity
of life in the modern state.
Cittaviveka, the
Buddhist monastery
in Hampshire in the
South of England,
is part of a large network of
monasteries in the Thai forest
tradition of Theravada Buddhism.
Unlike their Asian
counterparts, they
have to grapple with the
regulatory and legal demands
that modernity imposes
on a large organization.
Ajahn Sucitto is the
somewhat reluctant abbot.
>> I don't want to be running
everything and figuring
everything out.
Goodness me, no.
I mean, you have these abbots
who are just worked silly.
I'm quite happy to have more
people have a say on things
and I don't have
to think about it.
[LAUGHING]
>> No, I know what you mean.
>> And now, here, we have a
lot more lay committee deciding
things for us.
I just think it's too
complicated, too worldly,
for monks to have to
try and figure out.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
Legal, financial, going
into all the details
of signing contracts
on buildings.
It's just, you're really
out of your depth.
And we can get ripped apart by
these people who know how to--
we're just too innocent.
That is one of
the main problems,
I think, in the West is the
complexities of the society.
And it runs well because it's
got a lot of fine detail in it.
How you build something,
health and safety procedures,
they're enormously detailed.
>> The traditional monastic
model is finding a place
in the West, but often in hybrid
form, such as at Plum Village,
a monastery and nunnery
in the South of France.
Part of an international
network of monasteries
whose spiritual leader is the
highly regarded Vietnamese Zen
monk Thich Nhat
Hanh, it is supported
by both the Vietnamese
and convert communities.
Phap Luu is an American who sees
an advantage to monastic life.
>> I feel it's easier to be
100% immersed in the practice,
to really let go of all
the other attachments.
The things that we
have to do, working
and having a house or a place
to sleep at night, a car,
girlfriend.
I see that, since I became a
monk, those things, in a way,
we close the door on
that aspect of our life.
And so we can concentrate
100% on just the one
door of the practice.
>> In a practice center, when
you're living there year after
year, all of life really
does become Dharma.
Everything is-- you hear
the temple bell every day.
You're doing ritual
practice every day.
You're really living
in a Dharma environment
and never leaving it.
And so there's a
level of inner change.
You really do begin to have
a perspective that everything
is Dharma, your
whole life is Dharma.
I mean, there are
downsides to it as well.
It's a life of conformity.
It's a life of rules.
It's a life of limitation.
>> There certainly will be
a certain group of monastics
in the West, and I
think that's fine.
But I think it's an
old fashioned style
of life, monasticism.
For me, it belongs to feudalism.
>> Others believe
it always belongs.
In the mid-'60s, Robert Thurman
became the first American monk
in the Tibetan
Buddhist tradition.
Today, he holds a
chair in Indo Tibetan
Studies at Columbia University.
>> Buddhism depends upon
communities having this
generosity to support people
who do nothing useful,
who do nothing productive
from a social point of view.
Because in fact, they do the
ultimately productive thing
from the Buddhist
community's point of view--
the insiders' community
point of view-- which is they
seek freedom.
They seek to understand
the nature of reality.
They represent the full
devotion to that quest
for the rest of the community.
And therefore, they
inspire the lay community
to try to live at a
higher ethical standard,
to try to develop more,
focus more of their time
on the quest of
freedom, in reality.
And in fact, if fully
ordained and fully vow-keeping
monks and nuns are not in
the Buddhist community,
there is no Buddhist community.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> As Buddhism has become
established in the West,
Buddhist studies departments
have sprouted up within
the halls of academia.
While they teach scholarship
and not practice,
they frequently employ scholars
who are also practitioners.
Some of them have to
remain in the closet
about their practice.
>> To say that one is a Buddhist
scholar and practitioner would
just cause people to
go into conniptions.
In fact, I would
say, as recently
as 10 or 12 years
ago, you wouldn't
say that on your resume.
You wouldn't
continue to get jobs.
You wouldn't be counted as
a genuine academic, not as
a scholar.
A scholar has to have
a certain objectivity,
as though anyone who had
some feeling for a tradition
might use your position as
a pulpit to convert people.
It's very suspect.
>> I am sad to report that
the academic world in the West
still remains sort of
prisoner of a certain duality.
In a way, Christianity
is still very
powerful in religious studies.
And so on the one
hand, that element
is still somehow
[? subterranean ?] present.
And there's its kind
of equal and opposite,
which is dogmatic secularism
or dogmatic materialism,
of which the scientists are the
high priests, you could say.
So-called scientists
are the high priests.
And so the orthodoxy for
Buddhist studies scholars
still is that you should be
an anti-Buddhist, actually,
sadly to say.
Not merely just critically
evaluate, but actually anti.
In other words, a
Christian person
can go to Christian
church and then
study Christianity
in a favorable way
without intruding,
supposedly, his or her
Christian dogmas and things.
But a Buddhist can't,
especially a convert Buddhist.
Because they're like aliens.
And so they have to
actually be anti.
And the big game to advance
their careers in academia
is to try to show
Buddha was screwed up.
Maybe Buddha had a girlfriend.
Or some Buddhist
teacher is no good.
Or some Hindu swami was a
gay, or I don't know what.
Any kind of thing
to show that they're
as bad as the Western
religions are.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I have a fear that
in 50 years' time,
Buddhist centers will look a
bit like theosophical lodges do
to us today.
Filled with rather
elderly people, rather out
of touch with the current world,
and persisting in the rituals
and practices as though
nothing much as changed.
>> My hope is that the depth
of practice will not be lost.
>> There have to be Westerners
who've experienced awakening.
There's no doubt about it.
>> One of the great
obstacles, I think,
in Western Buddhism is the
fact that Western people,
in their materialistic
arrogance,
cannot imagine an
extraordinary person.
>> What I'm resisting,
and I think what is
counterproductive, is the idea
of a state of mind or being
that is attainable by an
individual that then makes you
somehow superhuman.
>> Always remain in
contact with your roots.
And the branches can fall down.
And it's not so important
if we maintain roots.
>> But what are the roots?
Buddhism has had 2,500
years to elaborate
on the original
teachings of the Buddha
within a wide variety
of Asian cultures.
Now, Western Dharma
teachers have the task
of separating out the
essence of the Dharma
from its Asian cultural forms.
But separating culture from
religion is not an easy task.
James Shaheen is the editor
of "Tricycle: The Buddhist
Review."
>> It's not possible really
to strip it down to its bare
essentials, I don't think.
Because it's inseparable
from culture.
It comes from people.
And it does, however, evolve
in different cultural contexts.
And every time that
happens, people
are going to have to ask
themselves, what is baby
and what is bathwater?
Now, that's not an
easy thing to answer.
Look at Allen Wallace
and Stephen Batchelor.
They have two very
different takes or responses
to the very same tradition.
>> In the 1970s, Allen Wallace
and Stephen Batchelor were
fellow Tibetan monks.
Today, Allen Wallace is a
Dharma teacher and scientist
based in Santa Barbara,
California and in Thailand
where he directs the Phuket
International Academy Mind
Center and runs intensive
eight-week shamatha meditation
retreats for his
Western students.
>> Is it true or is it not
that people have past lives?
Can we explore this
rigorously, objectively,
so that it stands up to even
the most careful scrutiny?
>> An experienced practitioner
of long-term solitary retreats,
he is very traditional in his
opinions about some of the new
interpretive currents
emerging in Western Buddhism.
>> As Buddhism moves
into modernity,
it's facing perhaps its greatest
challenge and its greatest
opportunity since its inception.
On the one hand, we find the
secularization of Buddhism.
There is, of course,
a lot of antipathy
towards a religion of
any kind by many secular
people in the modern world.
And so some people with this at
least a great sense of unease,
and perhaps actual
antipathy towards religion,
then look at Buddhism.
And they look at it and say,
well, this is a religion too.
Or at least, it has very
major religious aspects.
But we can salvage it.
We can salvage it.
We can save Buddhism.
And that is, we'll
just take what we like.
And that is, we
like mindfulness.
We like the cultivation
of loving kindness.
We like the ethical
principles of non-violence.
We like compassion.
And what winds up coming out
of this very selective approach
is Buddhism really then is
reincarnated, so to speak.
Or it evolves and
mutates into something
that I would say is tantamount
to a new school of psychology.
It has heavily
psychologized all references
to what the promoters of this
approach deem metaphysical.
Such things as the continuity
of individual consciousness
after death, the re-embodiment
of consciousness.
So we call it
reincarnation or rebirth.
The nature of karma, the
patterns or regularities
of karma, called
the laws of karma.
The qualities of
enlightenment itself.
And then, claims about the
greatly higher capacities
in terms of heightened
awareness, paranormal qualities
or abilities.
They either marginalize
these things
as if they're not really
important or just flat out say,
this is part of the
superstition of Buddhism.
And everything that does
not, say, correspond to
or is not compatible with
scientific materialism
and the discoveries of
science now, oh, the Buddha
never taught that.
The Buddha never dealt
with metaphysics.
As if metaphysics is one
category that we defined.
And then, as a universal, that
what is beyond our experience
is beyond everybody's
experience.
That's just ethnocentrism and
a type of really intellectual
colonialism.
>> The target of much of
Alan Wallace's criticism is
the ideas of his fellow Tibetan
monk of old, Steven Batchelor,
a writer, artist, and Dharma
teacher based near Bordeaux
in France.
If Allen is among the most
traditional Western Buddhist
teachers, Stephen
would certainly
be among the most reform minded.
The ideas in his latest book
are highly controversial.
Nevertheless, they are
getting a wide hearing
in the Buddhist community.
Based on his research
into the Pali canon
he's reached an unconventional
interpretation of what
the Buddha actually taught.
>> I'm basing my work at
the moment on my reading,
and I think a fairly
close reading,
of certain early texts
within the Pali tradition.
And also, I'm basing my
work on my own practice
of nearly 40 years of trying to
understand these teachings, not
just intellectually, but
also through contemplation,
meditation, reflection,
through my work.
You see, for me, the
practice of the Dharma
engages the whole of one's life.
The Buddha spoke of it
as the eightfold path.
That's actually a cummerbund
that I found in a dumpster.
That used to be just a
supermarket shopping bag.
To me, the practice
is the cultivation
of all eight aspects of that
path, including reflection,
including the work
you do, including
your ethical
relationships, including
your spiritual
practices, including
your view of the world.
And for me, therefore, a
practice cannot be reduced
simply to becoming proficient
in certain meditative skills.
I certainly would not dismiss
the importance of that.
But I would insist that
meditation practice always
be contextualized by the wider
frame of the eightfold path
itself, in other
words, the way of life
that the Buddha encouraged.
Rather than reductively saying,
this kind of meditative insight
is the key to enlightenment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The central point around
which all of traditional
Buddhism revolves is the
enlightenment of the Buddha,
the nirvana that he stated
is the potential of everyone,
and many since are
said to have realized.
But what is it?
The first writers
on Zen in English
were influenced by the
Rinzai-school, which emphasizes
satori, or kensho, a sudden and
brief enlightenment experience
transcending normal
dualistic consciousness
where one directly knows the
ultimate nature of reality.
Later, Japanese Zen teachers,
mostly of the Soto school,
like the San Francisco Zen
Center of Shunryu Suzuki,
instead emphasized the gradual
dawning of the awakened mind
in and as meditation practice.
>> He was following Dogen's
teaching, which was Zazen.
Not just Zazen, but
Zazen is enlightenment.
So he always emphasized
the practice.
Just do the practice.
Don't try to do it
for some reason.
Don't try to get
something out of practice.
So his practice is really
the purest practice.
Because it was not
intended to get anything.
It's simply just, you do
something for nothing.
And as soon as you
start to want something,
it's no longer pure practice.
>> If you look in the text
the way the Buddha taught,
he said--
awakening happens gradually and
slowly like the great oceans.
Go deeper and deeper and
deeper as you follow out
from the shore line.
And then, in another
text, he says--
stream entry, the dropping
away of all illusions
of self and separation happens
in a flash, in a moment.
And enlightenment itself can
be this great, dramatic moment
of release from the
separate body of fear
or the small sense of self into
the vast awakening of the heart
that is our true nature.
Which is true?
As is always the case in
these beautiful Buddhist
teachings, yes.
Yes is the answer.
>> The traditional understanding
that resolves this seeming
paradox is that each approach
emphasizes different aspects
of the path towards
Buddhahood or arhatship.
Sudden glimpses
of non-duality can
set the compass heading towards
the state of enlightenment.
But the mind still needs to
mature through gradual practice
and deepening insight
into emptiness,
the non-self nature, reality.
However, today, many
in Western Buddhism
give these experiences
less credence.
Because they question
something even more basic,
that there is such a thing
as the enlightened state.
>> The concept that everybody
in the West had in the beginning
of the enlightened master.
And the goal was enlightenment,
and everybody would come
and try to get enlightened.
And the place was run by an
enlightened master who would
have an enlightened successor.
And everybody was
groping for that goal.
That was never the case.
That was never the case in Asia.
It was never the case
anywhere, that even--
it was a projection of us,
we American young people.
It was a romantic, idealistic,
individualistic projection,
which was aided and abetted
by the Asian teachers who
came here, who were influenced
by that view themselves.
So in other words, almost
all the Asian teachers
who came here were aware
of Western thought,
were aware of
Western psychology,
were aware of the Enlightenment
lust that people had--
and spoke to that.
>> But what is Buddhahood?
I mean, I studied
with Zen teachers
who talk about small
satoris and big satoris.
And I know the
Tibetan description
of the bodhisattva bhumis.
But honestly, I have not
found one single teacher up
to now who could present
to me in his life,
in his person or her person--
in the way they could
explain the path--
that I have a clear image
of what enlightenment is,
except the lists I have learned.
So I don't know.
>> Of course, people
claim experiences.
And I have no reason to doubt
the veracity of what they say.
But unfortunately, simply to
make a first person claim,
it does not carry a lot
of explanatory power.
The more such
first person claims
there were, the more
authority they might have.
But I feel that for the Dharma
to be articulated in our day
and age, we need somehow to
bring together both our powers
of reason, our philosophies,
our scientific understanding
of the world, as well as
the kinds of experiences
that are opened up to us in the
practice of meditation itself.
And again, I don't want to
privilege one particular
experience-- let's
say of non-duality--
and give that some
kind of prestige,
rather than recognizing how the
Dharma and the stream in which
one enters is
something that engages
the whole of one's experience.
And so I don't have
much time, frankly,
for these ideas of non-duality.
>> Where is the authority?
And who has experienced
enlightenment at the standard
that they can talk about?
>> Matthieu Ricard,
once a geneticist,
is now a Tibetan monk in the
Nyingma Dzogchen tradition that
emphasizes the non-dual state
of enlightenment as the aim
of Buddhist practice.
>> So you see, there's a
difference between rumbling
with ideas and
then what came out
of the Buddha's enlightenment
as his teachings,
the commentary that
propose an elucidation
of the Buddha's work by
people like [INAUDIBLE]..
And then, the great
masters of the tradition
in Tibet, and up to modern
[? realist ?] teacher,
like those we are
lucky enough to meet.
So I mean, those,
they refer directly
to their own [? validation. ?]
Plus, if you need, they will
come with a perfectly logical
and based on the scripture.
They have immense
knowledge of the scripture.
They have immense experience.
So how can you put
that on the scale?
Put the whole Buddha's teaching
on one side and somebody's idea
on the other side?
And they're going to be
projected right in space.
>> The nature of the
enlightenment experience
by ordinary people
is inconceivable.
And therefore, they
tend to collapse it
into one of two options.
One option is a kind of
annihilation of everything
where nirvana is another
world of no experience at all.
Because they cannot imagine
blissful experience--
all experiences,
even what we normally
would think of his
pain-- as ecstatic.
They cannot imagine
a state like that.
So they think nirvana must be an
annihilation of consciousness,
of subjectivity.
So that's one extreme.
And the other extreme
is they collapse it
into being some
sort of euphemistic,
kind a little bit deceptive,
way of luring people
into resignation to
ordinariness, full resignation
into ordinariness.
>> If indeed the ultimate goal
of Buddhism is Buddhahood,
or arhatship, it does require
a great amount of practice.
And traditionally,
Asian Buddhists
have accepted that it
is an ongoing process
over multiple lifetimes.
But scientifically
educated Westerners
tend to be skeptical that
any aspect of consciousness
can traverse death.
And so many Western Buddhists
are agnostic about rebirth
or take the attitude that
it is a cultural remnant
of Buddhism's Indian
roots rather than
a foundational realization in
advanced meditation practice.
>> I mean, first,
rebirth is a speculation.
Rebirth is a concept.
I would say rebirth is an
expectation aimed at justice
which is not observable.
>> In the traditional
understanding of rebirth,
one's underlying stream of
moment-to-moment consciousness
is reborn because of karma, the
causal seeds planted by past
intentional actions.
Carola Roloff is a Tibetan nun
doing postdoctoral research
at the University of Hamburg.
>> This teaching on karma and
rebirth was the reason why I
converted from Protestant
Christianity to Buddhism.
Because I was looking for, what
is the reason for suffering?
And I couldn't
believe that God is
giving suffering to
the sentient beings
if he has created everything.
>> I am not open to the fact
of adhering to those doctrines
simply because tradition
requires me to.
And particularly,
a tradition where
you can find a number of
passages in the earliest canon
where the Buddha
himself speaks very
dismissively of being concerned
about what happens after death,
for example.
I mean, it's not clear-cut.
The Buddha is ambivalent.
Some passages have him
speaking about rebirth.
Others have him rather
skeptical about it.
But I think what the
Buddha was probably
saying was that this sort of
conversation we're having now
is actually kind of
missing the point.
That to get so
preoccupied with issues
that are basically tangential
to the core practice
is basically a waste of time.
What exactly it
is that is reborn?
Is it me?
No.
Is it my unfinished business?
Probably, yes.
And then, is it reborn by some
kind of magical device dropping
into the zygote when sperm
and egg get together,
and the third bit comes in,
plop, and that's your karma?
Is it like that, which
some Tibetans would argue?
Or is it, as a Westerner
such as myself might argue,
to say that there is the
biological inheritance--
which you could, if you
want, call biological karma--
namely the genome?
And then after that, because of
the cleverness of our genome,
we begin to acquire learning
from parents, schools?
And the whole cultural
stuff comes in
with its prejudices,
its likes and dislikes,
the whole karmic stuff which
creates trouble in life?
So I mean, when I hear
about reincarnation,
I usually think of this as
the reincarnation of karma
which has come from
preceding generations.
And we've learned it.
We've acquired it
through culture.
It's not being dropped in some
magical way into our zygote.
That's my own view.
But then, I'm a biologist,
so I would think that way.
>> If you look at the notion of
a continuum of consciousness--
because after all,
rebirth is about that.
Everything else is
culture in the West.
It's completely out of the
culture to believe in rebirth.
In the East, it's so common
that you don't even question it.
But the real question is, what's
the nature of consciousness?
From Buddhists, that
analysis is very clear.
The immediately preceding event
that triggers the next one,
there has to be some kind
of coherence of nature.
You cannot go from,
in one instance,
being a seed of wheat, and then
the next instance here you have
an apple.
There is a continuum in the--
so that means the totally
inanimate instant,
the next instance, [INAUDIBLE]
conscious [INAUDIBLE] is not.
So of course, the big
picture is a meta picture,
like the evolution of species
with the complexification
of the nervous system.
But that's a long story.
It's not in the millisecond.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The Tibetan tulku system
institutionalizes rebirth,
having sought out new emanations
of previous great teachers
for many hundreds of years.
James Gimian is the publisher
of the "Shambala Sun"
magazine and "Buddhadharma:
The Practitioner's Quarterly."
He was a student of the late
tulku Chogyam Trungpa Rimpoche.
And he believes that
the ultimate value
of the tulku system
is not whether it's
based on the truth of rebirth.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The 16th to the 17th Gyalwa
Karmapa is a good example.
In the 1970s and through
1981 when he died,
the 16th Gyalwa Karmapa
was a wonderful inspiration
of Buddhist practice throughout
North America and the West,
as he toured three
times and taught.
He died in 1981.
But there has now arisen,
in the form of a fellow
who is 22 years old, his
successor, the 17th Karmapa,
who has just made his first
trip two years ago to the West.
He presents the continuity
of the inspiration
of a way of practicing and
being as a human being.
What does that mean to the
thousands of followers?
Do they have to believe that
some magical transmission
of a human personality
went somewhere for 14 years
and then reemerged
in a little baby?
Or do they experience
the continuity
of a particular wisdom
that helps them?
I think the proof
of the tulki system
isn't about whether rebirth
or reincarnation is true.
It's about whether the
succession of teachers
actually bring benefit
to human beings.
>> In the tulku system,
as in any institution,
human politics can play a part.
The recognition of the
aforementioned 17th Karmapa,
for example, is in dispute
with an alternative candidate
being promoted by a
prominent disciple
of the previous incarnation.
The dispute has been
acrimonious and has boiled over
into Western Dharma
centers, causing one teacher
to question if the
tulku institution should
be part of Tibetan
Buddhism in the West.
Lama Denys Rinpoche is
the spiritual director
of Karma Ling, a large
retreat and teaching
center in the French Alps.
>> [INAUDIBLE] big problems.
Just look at the situation.
I don't need to comment.
So [INAUDIBLE] the traditional
society some regulation that
don't work in the West.
And so it's a system
without regulation.
It's not a Buddhist system.
It's kind of more feudal.
We don't really need
that here in the West.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Just as the essence of the
teachings is being questioned
in the West, so new ways of
applying it are developing.
The notion that individuals
and their societies
can be free from
selfishness and greed
is implicit within the Dharma.
Because they are the causal
result of the ignorance,
of the non-self
nature of things,
they are extinguished by the
compassion that flows directly
from the awakened heart.
In the West, that compassion
has resulted in the emergence
of a socially engaged Buddhism.
About 30 years ago,
Bernie Glassman Roshi
started doing street retreats,
living among homeless people.
>> One thing that happens
when you live in the streets,
you're living in the moment.
That's something we're trying
to get people to experience.
And it's easy to get them to
experience that in the streets.
But after the retreat
was over, what
struck me was that the
only religious groups,
spiritual groups, that were
assisting folks in the streets
were Christian.
Well, a little after that,
I did a very big program
called Greyston, which worked
with the homeless in Yonkers.
They're large scale.
That's me about 30 years ago.
>> His economic
development initiatives,
Greyston Bakery and Foundation,
grew into multi-million dollar
enterprises and
provided work, services,
and low-cost housing for the
poorest members of the Yonkers,
New York Community, where he
was based until a half a dozen
years ago.
>> So that's with my--
he's my clown teacher.
>> At that time, he divested
of all administrative positions
and was looking
forward to freedom from
their time-draining
responsibilities.
But instead, his community
prevailed upon him
to start something new.
And he purchased an abandoned
anti-nuclear commune
in western Massachusetts.
>> I had given away everything.
I had been abbott
of a few places,
and still have abbots
at those places.
I still have somebody
to run Greyston.
I had no assets.
I did not want that.
I wanted the streets
to be my headquarters.
And then, there were
people that said,
we really should
have a mother house.
There should be
something for the future.
It's not just you, Bernie.
You can't just live
in the streets.
>> And you couldn't
say no to that.
>> And yeah,
eventually, I gave in.
Part of me regrets it
because I wound up back
into raising money and paying
off debts and all of that.
And I had gotten at
that time to a place
where I didn't have anything.
And I didn't have any--
it was the freedom
of the streets,
which I've always loved.
But I understand the
importance of the future.
>> Bernie has found
numerous ways to apply Zen.
He started the Zen
Peacemakers Order
in the 1980s, which now has 70
affiliates on five continents.
And he's been leading retreats
to Auschwitz since 1994.
Over the last few
years, he's begun
the prototype of a new program.
>> It's what we call Zen
Houses, which would be places
for Dharma practitioners
to practice their Dharma
and to serve the community.
I want every Zen House to
have what I'm calling a cafe.
The motto of our cafe is fine
food, music, games, puppetry,
and wellness.
[INAUDIBLE]
>> And I also have another
theme for our cafe,
which is service with
dignity, service with love.
So if you come to
our cafe, you can't
tell who's poor, who's rich.
>> Let's make a sail.
>> [INAUDIBLE] we have
entertainment, music,
different kinds of--
we're part of a marching band.
We have magicians.
We have hikes into the woods.
And then, after the meal,
we provide various kinds
of wellness components.
We have a medical director.
So we can actually provide
medical checkups and advice.
And we have an AA
meeting that happens.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So this is a model
for a soup kitchen
that I want to replicate
across the country.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I define enlightenment as
realizing and actualizing
the interdependence of
life, the oneness of life.
The way you can tell the depth
of a person's enlightenment
is by how they serve others.
People ask me what [? duty ?]
is important to Buddhism.
And I say humor, a
very important element.
>> A more traditional Buddhist
approach to social engagement
is that of Roland Yuno Rech,
one of the principle students
of the late Taisen Deshimaru,
who brought Zen to France
in the 1960s and founded the
Association Zen Internationale,
today the largest
Zen group in Europe.
>> I think the idea is good,
principle is fantastic.
But in practice, I think we are
at the beginning of planting
the Dharma in the West.
And if we spend too much time on
bakeries and things like that,
it takes a lot of energy.
And what I am doing is
teaching all kind of people.
I advise them to really
practice the Dharma
in their professions.
I have a lot of doctors
and nurses, for example,
in my sangha.
And those people, I
advise them that when
they are working as a
doctor or as a nurse,
should make it really
[INAUDIBLE] Dharma practice.
But [? I'm ?] not [? going ?]
to make a Zen hospital.
It is better to be
a true bodhisattva.
And I strongly believe necessary
ritual, practice in temples,
to practice [INAUDIBLE]
in the right form,
and respecting the tradition.
And from that, [INAUDIBLE]
of society mix with people
and bring our
practice into society.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One of the effects of
post-industrial modernity is
that all forms of spiritual
teaching live in close
proximity to one another,
often in the same neighborhood.
The kinds of distorted ideas
about other Buddhist traditions
that existed in Asia
are less sustainable
when practitioners
can easily listen
to teachers from other
schools, often as guests
within their own centers.
>> It had been that if you
went to Burma and talked about
Tibetan Buddhism, many of
the Burmese believed Tibetan
Buddhism to be some weird,
perverted form of Hindu Tantra
which had images of the Buddha
in carnal positions with women.
And they couldn't
believe it was Buddhism.
And if you talk to the
Burmese when they would go,
or the Thais when they would
go, and visit Japan and see
Zen masters hitting people
with sticks, they would--
as one of my great
Burmese masters
said-- this can't be Buddhism.
And the Buddha never taught
us to hit people with sticks.
This is an aberration.
Or you have the Zen people
who would look at Theravada
and say, oh, that's
only low class.
They don't have emptiness.
Or the Tibetans who would
think it was hinayanas.
And basically, they hadn't
talked to each other
for 1,000 or 1,500 years.
Now, at Spirit Rock,
at our center at IMS,
though we're very much
rooted on tradition,
we also have this deep
dialogue with other traditions.
And it's happening everywhere.
Our own teachers have
trained primarily
in Threavada and
Vipassana practice.
But almost everyone has also
trained in Tibetan Vajrayana
practice and in Zen practice and
brings in those sensibilities.
And this is part of the beauty
of what's happening in the West
at this time is that we're
able to draw on and learn--
not in a potpourri way, but
in a deep understanding--
the best skillful means
of these traditions
and see actually how
they fit together.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Further elaboration on
this bridging of sectarian
differences occurs when the
close proximity of different
religions inspires an effort to
increase mutual understanding
and appreciation.
Sometimes, though,
it can backfire.
Norman Fisher borrows
from his Zen experience
to teach a class in
Jewish meditation.
[CHANTING]
>> And as we sit, we have
an attitude of openness
and curiosity for whatever
else would arise in our mind
or heart.
>> Rabbi [? Lou, ?] my colleague
and dear friend who founded
the [INAUDIBLE] with me, he
would do Jewish teachings and I
would do Zen teachings.
And we would do this
thing side by side.
And it became really
a problem because we
were inviting comparisons.
And we kind of ended
up doing retreats
that were comparative religion.
And it wasn't that good.
Because then, you're
always comparing,
and it gets theoretical.
And furthermore, a lot
of the Jewish people
were comparing Judaism quite
unfavorably to Buddhism.
Because the people who
were coming to the retreats
were people who liked
Buddhism and were
drawn to the Buddhism
part and wanted to vent
their problems with Judaism.
So this was very hard
on the poor rabbi.
So eventually, we decided to
just make it Jewish meditation
and not have any
reference to Buddhism.
And to be honest
and tell people,
well, we were just
borrowing a technique
that we both learned in
an unbroken lineage that
was strong.
And we were taking
that technique
and applying it to Judaism.
>> A more contentious
development occurs when
the boundaries between
different religions get blurred
by adopting another's practice,
complete with its names
and forms.
A number of Christian
clerics, for example,
have received Zen transmission--
mostly from one Japanese Roshi--
and have proceeded to
teach what they call Zen,
even encouraging the
kensho experience,
but without the Buddhist
philosophical framework
to illuminate its meaning.
>> And the framework
really matters.
The idea that there's some
ineffable something that
transcends all frameworks.
If that's theoretically
true, it really
doesn't make any difference.
Because as soon as you
open up your mouth,
and as soon as you are a
person, you're in a framework.
And so the frameworks
do matter quite a bit.
>> My own teacher, Master
[? Sheng Yen, ?] made the point
that practice must be
dependent upon concept.
And the concept of
the practice of Zen
is Four Noble Truths and the
law of co-dependent arising, all
of that.
So any master who, as it were,
transmits to somebody just
because they've had
a kensho experience
and who want to go and
talk about their experience
within the Christian context--
from my master, from my
teacher's point of view--
that is rubbish.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Where is Western
Buddhism heading?
There are trends
that raise questions
about the dilution
of the practice,
the normalizing
of enlightenment,
the marginalizing of rebirth,
the popularizing of Buddhist
meditation techniques outside
of a Buddhist context,
and perhaps most challenging,
the demands of modern life
that make lay rather
than monastic practice
the keystone of
Western Buddhism.
Can lay practitioners make
enough time and effort
within their scattered,
demanding lives
to do depth practice?
Or will Dharma lite
become the norm?
>> I think it's a big question.
Because I see that
Americans, for the most part,
would rather do something in two
years and become enlightened.
They don't want to do
these long retreats.
They don't want to do all the
long foundational practices
of an [INAUDIBLE] with a hundred
thousands of frustrations
and the 100-syllable
mantra, et cetera.
They don't want to learn the
succession of ritual practices
that are very important
in Tibetan Buddhism
in order to really develop
the kind of realization
and maturity in the practice.
And so the question is, how can
the real power and integrity
of the Dharma teachings be
preserved in the generations
that are to come?
>> My students have told
me, Professor Willis,
that's not quite fair.
If we do it this way--
by picking and
choosing, by being free,
by mixing traditions--
that is American Buddhism.
That's going to be
the American Buddhism.
Stop resisting.
And I say, but I want to
be able to recognize it.
Do I call it psychology?
Do I call it stress reduction?
Do I call it art?
I want to be able to
recognize it as Buddhism.
So there, I'm old hat, old
traditionalist conservative.
>> From my standpoint,
I say that everybody has
the ingredients they have.
And they make the best
offerings they have.
So if there are
offerings being made
and somebody else says,
well, that's watering down,
well, there's always millions
of offerings being made.
And for those who
are ready and only
ready to work with
those methods that
look like they're watering down
things, that's the right thing.
That is moving them
a step or whatever.
And for those who
want other things,
they'll find other things.
>> There are people who live
among us in normal business
activity and careers who are
dedicating 100 days a year
to deep retreat practice, who
are dedicating two to three
hours a day of meditation
practice that they weave
into their so-called
normal lives.
We lose sight that there
are thousands of Westerners
with a deep connection
to the Dharma
who aren't doing purely
the monastic tradition,
as it was known or it
was done in the East,
but are really mixing that
deep transformative Buddhist
meditation practice
with their everyday role
in the society and
life in the West.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Whenever the Dharma has
migrated to a new culture,
it has changed.
But so has the culture,
often in significant ways.
One increasingly important
influence Buddhism
is having on modernity is
through research programs
into the effects of
meditation, being carried out
by psychologists
and neuroscientists
with the active support and
encouragement of the Dalai
Lama.
>> At MIT meeting, we had 1,000
scientists in the audience,
five Nobel Prize.
His Holiness gave
the opening address
to the neuroscience meeting,
25,000 neuroscientists.
There were 600 people
who are against it.
And when the door opened, they
were running to the first row.
And Richard Davidson
said, in 20 years,
I never saw any
address [INAUDIBLE]
where people were running.
So there's something there.
Well, compared to 20 years
ago, it's is a gigantic step.
>> To a very large extent,
cognitive scientists have not
been that open or willing to
question their own assumptions.
And so they just
ignore evidence that
contradicts their very
cherished metaphysical beliefs.
So that has to go.
And Buddhists have to
overcome-- we Buddhists have
to overcome our own sense
of dogmatism and complacency
in our own assumptions.
But if we can do that
and come together
with an open-minded,
radically empirical way
where we're willing to
be critical of our own
assumptions, a
whole new discipline
could arise that would have
implications for ethics,
for mental health, understanding
the mind, consciousness,
and the role of consciousness
in the natural world.
>> The Buddhist
scientific tradition,
the Buddhist psychological
meditational tradition,
and the Buddhist ethical
and political tradition,
those services that the insider
community offered to the many
societies in which
it was found useful,
is offering it to
the planet today.
And that is essential to
the planet's survival.
That will reinforce the good
aspects of all the world
religions without
competing with them.
It will reinforce the good
aspects of secular humanism.
It will reinforce
the good aspects
of scientific investigation
of the nature of reality,
both internal, psychological,
mental reality,
as well as external
physical reality.
And it is of great essence,
actually, in the world.
Not as a religion,
and not as a religious
[? missionarization ?]
of the world,
but as a scientific, political,
psychological, and ethical
service offering and
service accessing
for the world's population,
that is what is critical.
[MUSIC PLAYING]